# paint by numbers

TLDR: [A website I made](https://carsoncummins11.github.io/paintbynumbers/) for using paint you have for new custom paint by numbers

Recently I have done several paint by numbers kits, but I almost never used up all of the paint. It seemed like a waste to throw it all away, so I figured I'd try to figure out a way to use it up. The issue is I'm about as good at art as the average crypto enthusiast is at software dev (horrible). 

The good news is that I have a bunch of pictures, and a bunch of math education, so I should be able to figure out some sort of solution. I should point out before I start that several much better paint by numbers generators exist online (two that I see are [here](https://paint-by-number.com/pages/create-your-own-paint-by-number) and [here](https://pbnify.com/)). However, both of these, and many other examples online, prescribe color palettes to you, by actively choosing them for you or forcing you to use colors that already exist in the image. I already own the paint colors, so that's not going to work great for me. So my ideal solution is just a website that takes in my paint colors and an image, and spits out a paint by numbers.

Disclaimer: I'm sure the more data science aware among us could tell me a much better algorithm for what I'm about to do, but when it comes to learning I'm a big fan of "fuck around and find out" over "read about someone else fucking around to find out", so here's my attempt at doing and documenting that.

The first step in a website that takes in colors and images as inputs is to let it take in colors and images as inputs. This is a simple statement, and HTML makes it even simpler by having native elements for color inputs and file uploads. I also pretend to do web dev for a living, so I churned that out pretty quick. After a little processing, I'm left with a list of 3-tuples representing the color palette RGB values, and a resource url for the image. I used an image url because I figured someone else had already written a lot of the image processing routines I was going to need, they'd let me use a resource url to load images in, and god forbid I try to fuck around with shaping tensors in the way someone else expects them. I ended up using [image-js](https://github.com/image-js/image-js) because I googled "images js" and that was the first thing that came up, and it seemed to do what I wanted.

So now I had an image object that I can do some things to, and a list of colors that I want said image to be. At first I tried just making each pixel in the image the same color as whatever 3-tuple had the closest euclidean distance to it in the color palette, but that looked really bad. It also didn't have the classic paint by numbers blobs of color, which I could number, hence making it impossible to "paint by number". Forever unwilling to ask the internet, I guessed that blurring it would make more homogenous blobs appear, because that's what happens when I take off my glasses. Image JS didn't have an obviously available inbuilt blur function, but I did stumble upon a convolution function, so I thugged it out and typed out a gaussian blur kernel by hand. Then I did the same closest euclidean distance thing on the gaussian kernel blurred image and the resulting recolored image looked quite a bit more like an acceptable paint by numbers painting. 

So now that I had the "paint" part of paint by numbers figured out, it was time for the "numbers" part, which seemed significantly scarier. A normal paint by numbers is a bunch of numbered outlines of blobs on a white page, not a finished painting. So I was gonna have to convert the finished painting into a bunch of blobs, draw their outlines, and then number those blobs according to color. Identifying blobs is actually a super huge and important problem in data science called clustering, so tons of famous algorithms like k-means, BIRCH, etc having been invented to solve it super well. I did not go try and relearn that BS, I was here to fuck around, not read about someone else fucking around. 

My idea, which had the same amount of forethought as that squirrel from Ice Age chasing a nut, was to make the photoshop bucket tool and make it repeatedly click on each pixel that had not already been filled up by previous clicks, and track what click number each pixel was filled on. So I created a 2D int array (lets call it the "cluster ids"), where each integer would store what number click the bucket tool had filled that pixel on. Making the bucket tool from photoshop is really easy when you're okay with abusing the shit out of js function stack memory, just make a recursive function that marks the input pixel in the "cluster ids" array and calls itself on any pixel that is adjacent to, not marked in "cluster ids" and the same color as the input pixel. While pretty abusive of all sorts of memory and such, this method was pretty quick to write and gave me what I wanted, a way to map each pixel to a specific blob it was a part of, and to know that blob was all the same color. 

Now that I'd made all the clusters, and it actually worked decently well (to my surprise), I just had to draw outlines and numbers onto a new image, which would be the final product of my website. This was super simple using the cluster map I'd just made, I simply made every pixel white in the new image, then made every pixel with a differently cluster id-ed neighbor black, which drew outlines pretty easily! I'm sure my old topology prof would give me some bs about how this was a bad assumption, but stuff seemed to work out. Numbering the clusters turned out to be quite a bit more difficult a problem than I'd expected, and given that at this point I'd been coding for a few hours I threw in the towel and churned out the first solution I could think of.

Getting the numbers for each blob is easy enough - just take one pixel in the blob and sample what color it should be in the final product. However, deciding where to draw that number is fucking HARD. An ideal number placement is A - as central as possible and B - not overlapping any of the black outlines. However, deciding where is "as central as possible" in an arbitrary blob is really annoying. I'm sure there's been some smart research into it, but I could not figure out at all how to make that happen, so I focused more on "not overlapping any of the black outlines". At the font size I was using, I needed a 10 pixel tall by 5 pixel wide outline-free rectangle to put each number in to ensure it wouldn't overlap anything. Obviously some Leetcode-style bullshit was in order, and whenever that's the case the "sliding window algorithm" comes in handy. That's it that was the answer it was really dumb and I wish I thought of a smarter way to do it. Anyways, you should check out the [final product](https://carsoncummins11.github.io/paintbynumbers/), I will not be making any updates. 